## Running Icinga

### Init Script

Icinga 2's init script is installed in */etc/init.d/icinga2* by default:

    # /etc/init.d/icinga2
    Usage: /etc/init.d/icinga2 {start|stop|restart|reload|checkconfig|status}

#### start

The *start* action starts the Icinga 2 daemon.

#### stop

The *stop* action stops the Icinga 2 daemon.

#### restart

The *restart* action is a shortcut for running the *stop* action followed by
*start*.

#### reload

The *reload* action sends the HUP signal to Icinga 2 which causes it to restart.
Unlike the *restart* action *reload* does not wait until Icinga 2 has restarted.

#### checkconfig

The *checkconfig* action checks if the */etc/icinga2/icinga2.conf* configuration
file contains any errors.

#### status

The *status* action checks if Icinga 2 is running:

    $ /etc/init.d/icinga2 status
    Icinga 2 status: Running

### <a id="cmdline"></a> Command-line Options

    $ icinga2 --help
    icinga2 - The Icinga 2 network monitoring daemon.

    Supported options:
      --help                show this help message
      -V [ --version ]      show version information
      -l [ --library ] arg  load a library
      -I [ --include ] arg  add include search directory
      -c [ --config ] arg   parse a configuration file
      -C [ --validate ]     exit after validating the configuration
      -x [ --debug ]        enable debugging
      -d [ --daemonize ]    detach from the controlling terminal
      -e [ --errorlog ] arg log fatal errors to the specified log file (only works
                            in combination with --daemonize)
      -u [ --user ] arg     user to run Icinga as
      -g [ --group ] arg    group to run Icinga as

    Report bugs at <https://dev.icinga.org/>
    Icinga home page: <http://www.icinga.org/>

#### Libraries

Instead of loading libraries using the [*library* config directive](#library)
you can also use the *--library* command-line option.

#### Config Include Path

When including files you can specify that the include search path should be
checked. You can do this by putting your config file name in angle brackets
like this:

    include <test.conf>

This would cause Icinga 2 to search its include path for the configuration file
*test.conf*. By default the installation path for the Icinga Template Library
is the only search directory.

Using the *--include* command-line option additional search directories can be
added.

#### Config Files

Using the *--config* option you can specify one or more config files. Config
files are processed in the order they're specified on the command-line.

#### Config Validation

The *--validate* option can be used to check if your configuration files
contain errors. If any errors are found the exit status is 1, otherwise 0
is returned.

### <a id="features"></a> Enabling/Disabling Features

Icinga 2 provides configuration files for some commonly used features. These
are installed in the */etc/icinga2/features-available* directory and can be
enabled and disabled using the *i2enfeature* and *i2disfeature* tools,
respectively.

The *i2enfeature* tool creates symlinks in the */etc/icinga2/features-enabled*
directory which is included by default in the example configuration file.

You can view a list of available feature configuration files:

    # i2enfeature
    Syntax: i2enfeature <feature>
    Enables the specified feature.

    Available features: compat

Using the *i2enfeature* command you can enable features:

    # i2enfeature compat
    Module 'compat' was enabled.
    Make sure to restart Icinga 2 for these changes to take effect.

You can disable features using the *i2disfeature* command:

    # i2disfeature compat
    Module 'compat' was disabled.
    Make sure to restart Icinga 2 for these changes to take effect.

> **Note**
>
> The *i2enfeature* and *i2disfeature* commands do not restart Icinga 2.