# <a id="monitoring-basics"></a> Monitoring Basics

This part of the Icinga 2 documentation provides an overview of all the basic
monitoring concepts you need to know to run Icinga 2.

## <a id="hosts-services"></a> Hosts and Services

Icinga 2 can be used to monitor the availability of hosts and services. Hosts
and services can be virtually anything which can be checked in some way:

* Network services (HTTP, SMTP, SNMP, SSH, etc.)
* Printers
* Switches / routers
* Temperature sensors
* Other local or network-accessible services

Host objects provide a mechanism to group services that are running
on the same physical device.

Here is an example of a host object which defines two child services:

    object Host "my-server1" {
      address = "10.0.0.1"
      check_command = "hostalive"
    }

    object Service "ping4" {
      host_name = "my-server1"
      check_command = "ping4"
    }

    object Service "http" {
      host_name = "my-server1"
      check_command = "http"
    }

The example creates two services `ping4` and `http` which belong to the
host `my-server1`.

It also specifies that the host should perform its own check using the `hostalive`
check command.

The `address` attribute is used by check commands to determine which network
address is associated with the host object.

Details on troubleshooting check problems can be found [here](8-troubleshooting.md#troubleshooting).

### <a id="host-states"></a> Host States

Hosts can be in any of the following states:

  Name        | Description
  ------------|--------------
  UP          | The host is available.
  DOWN        | The host is unavailable.

### <a id="service-states"></a> Service States

Services can be in any of the following states:

  Name        | Description
  ------------|--------------
  OK          | The service is working properly.
  WARNING     | The service is experiencing some problems but is still considered to be in working condition.
  CRITICAL    | The service is in a critical state.
  UNKNOWN     | The check could not determine the service's state.

### <a id="hard-soft-states"></a> Hard and Soft States

When detecting a problem with a host/service Icinga re-checks the object a number of
times (based on the `max_check_attempts` and `retry_interval` settings) before sending
notifications. This ensures that no unnecessary notifications are sent for
transient failures. During this time the object is in a `SOFT` state.

After all re-checks have been executed and the object is still in a non-OK
state the host/service switches to a `HARD` state and notifications are sent.

  Name        | Description
  ------------|--------------
  HARD        | The host/service's state hasn't recently changed.
  SOFT        | The host/service has recently changed state and is being re-checked.

### <a id="host-service-checks"></a> Host and Service Checks

Hosts and Services determine their state from a check result returned from a check
execution to the Icinga 2 application. By default the `generic-host` example template
will define `hostalive` as host check. If your host is unreachable for ping, you should
consider using a different check command, for instance the `http` check command, or if
there is no check available, the `dummy` check command.

    object Host "uncheckable-host" {
      check_command = "dummy"
      vars.dummy_state = 1
      vars.dummy_text = "Pretending to be OK."
    }

Service checks could also use a `dummy` check, but the common strategy is to
[integrate an existing plugin](3-monitoring-basics.md#command-plugin-integration) as
[check command](3-monitoring-basics.md#check-commands) and [reference](3-monitoring-basics.md#command-passing-parameters)
that in your [Service](12-object-types.md#objecttype-service) object definition.

## <a id="configuration-best-practice"></a> Configuration Best Practice

The [Getting Started](2-getting-started.md#getting-started) chapter already introduced various aspects
of the Icinga 2 configuration language. If you are ready to configure additional
hosts, services, notifications, dependencies, etc, you should think about the
requirements first and then decide for a possible strategy.

There are many ways of creating Icinga 2 configuration objects:

* Manually with your preferred editor, for example vi(m), nano, notepad, etc.
* Generated by a [configuration management too](2-getting-started.md#configuration-tools) such as Puppet, Chef, Ansible, etc.
* A configuration addon for Icinga 2
* A custom exporter script from your CMDB or inventory tool
* your own.

In order to find the best strategy for your own configuration, ask yourself the following questions:

* Do your hosts share a common group of services (for example linux hosts with disk, load, etc checks)?
* Only a small set of users receives notifications and escalations for all hosts/services?

If you can at least answer one of these questions with yes, look for the [apply rules](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply) logic
instead of defining objects on a per host and service basis.

* You are required to define specific configuration for each host/service?
* Does your configuration generation tool already know about the host-service-relationship?

Then you should look for the object specific configuration setting `host_name` etc accordingly.

Finding the best files and directory tree for your configuration is up to you. Make sure that
the [icinga2.conf](2-getting-started.md#icinga2-conf) configuration file includes them, and then think about:

* tree-based on locations, hostgroups, specific host attributes with sub levels of directories.
* flat `hosts.conf`, `services.conf`, etc files for rule based configuration.
* generated configuration with one file per host and a global configuration for groups, users, etc.
* one big file generated from an external application (probably a bad idea for maintaining changes).
* your own.

In either way of choosing the right strategy you should additionally check the following:

* Are there any specific attributes describing the host/service you could set as `vars` custom attributes?
You can later use them for applying assign/ignore rules, or export them into external interfaces.
* Put hosts into hostgroups, services into servicegroups and use these attributes for your apply rules.
* Use templates to store generic attributes for your objects and apply rules making your configuration more readable.
Details can be found in the [using templates](3-monitoring-basics.md#object-inheritance-using-templates) chapter.
* Apply rules may overlap. Keep a central place (for example, [services.conf](2-getting-started.md#services-conf) or [notifications.conf](2-getting-started.md#notifications-conf)) storing
the configuration instead of defining apply rules deep in your configuration tree.
* Every plugin used as check, notification or event command requires a `Command` definition.
Further details can be looked up in the [check commands](3-monitoring-basics.md#check-commands) chapter.

If you happen to have further questions, do not hesitate to join the [community support channels](https://support.icinga.org)
and ask community members for their experience and best practices.


### <a id="object-inheritance-using-templates"></a> Object Inheritance Using Templates

Templates may be used to apply a set of identical attributes to more than one
object:

    template Service "generic-service" {
      max_check_attempts = 3
      check_interval = 5m
      retry_interval = 1m
      enable_perfdata = true
    }

    template Service "ipv6-service {
      notes = "IPv6 critical != IPv4 broken."
    }

    apply Service "ping4" {
      import "generic-service"

      check_command = "ping4"

      assign where host.address
    }

    apply Service "ping6" {
      import "generic-service"
      import "ipv6-service"

      check_command = "ping6"

      assign where host.address6
    }


In this example the `ping4` and `ping6` services inherit properties from the
template `generic-service`. The `ping6` service additionally imports the `ipv6-service`
template with the `notes` attribute.

Objects as well as templates themselves can import an arbitrary number of
templates. Attributes inherited from a template can be overridden in the
object if necessary.

You can import existing non-template objects into objects which
requires you to use unique names for templates and objects sharing
the same namespace.

Example for importing objects:

    object CheckCommand "snmp-simple" {
      ...
      vars.snmp_defaults = ...
    }

    object CheckCommand "snmp-advanced" {
      import "snmp-simple"
      ...
      vars.snmp_advanced = ...
    }

### <a id="using-apply"></a> Apply objects based on rules

Instead of assigning each object ([Service](12-object-types.md#objecttype-service),
[Notification](12-object-types.md#objecttype-notification), [Dependency](12-object-types.md#objecttype-dependency),
[ScheduledDowntime](12-object-types.md#objecttype-scheduleddowntime))
based on attribute identifiers for example `host_name` objects can be [applied](10-language-reference.md#apply).

Before you start using the apply rules keep the following in mind:

* Define the best match.
    * A set of unique [custom attributes](3-monitoring-basics.md#custom-attributes-apply) for these hosts/services?
    * Or [group](3-monitoring-basics.md#groups) memberships, e.g. a host being a member of a hostgroup, applying services to it?
    * A generic pattern [match](10-language-reference.md#function-calls) on the host/service name?
    * [Multiple expressions combined](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply-expressions) with `&&` or `||` [operators](10-language-reference.md#expression-operators)
* All expressions must return a boolean value (an empty string is equal to `false` e.g.)

> **Note**
>
> You can set/override object attributes in apply rules using the respectively available
> objects in that scope (host and/or service objects).

[Custom attributes](3-monitoring-basics.md#custom-attributes) can also store nested dictionaries and arrays. That way you can use them
for not only matching for their existance or values in apply expressions, but also assign
("inherit") their values into the generated objected from apply rules.

* [Apply services to hosts](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply-services)
* [Apply notifications to hosts and services](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply-notifications)
* [Apply dependencies to hosts and services](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply-scheduledowntimes)
* [Apply scheduled downtimes to hosts and services](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply-scheduledowntimes)

A more advanced example is using [apply with for loops on arrays or
dictionaries](#using-apply-for) for example provided by
[custom atttributes](3-monitoring-basics.md#custom-attributes-apply) or groups.

> **Tip**
>
> Building configuration in that dynamic way requires detailed information
> of the generated objects. Use the `object list` [CLI command](5-cli-commands.md#cli-command-object)
> after successful [configuration validation](5-cli-commands.md#config-validation).


#### <a id="using-apply-expressions"></a> Apply Rules Expressions

You can use simple or advanced combinations of apply rule expressions. Each
expression must evaluate into the boolean `true` value. An empty string
will be for instance interpreted as `false`. In a similar fashion undefined
attributes will return `false`.

Returns `false`:

    assign where host.vars.attribute_does_not_exist

Multiple `assign where` condition rows are evaluated as `OR` condition.

You can combine multiple expressions for matching only a subset of objects. In some cases,
you want to be able to add more than one assign/ignore where expression which matches
a specific condition. To achieve this you can use the logical `and` and `or` operators.


Match all `*mysql*` patterns in the host name and (`&&`) custom attribute `prod_mysql_db`
matches the `db-*` pattern. All hosts with the custom attribute `test_server` set to `true`
should be ignored, or any host name ending with `*internal` pattern.

    object HostGroup "mysql-server" {
      display_name = "MySQL Server"

      assign where match("*mysql*", host.name) && match("db-*", host.vars.prod_mysql_db)
      ignore where host.vars.test_server == true
      ignore where match("*internal", host.name)
    }

Similar example for advanced notification apply rule filters: If the service
attribute `notes` contains the `has gold support 24x7` string `AND` one of the
two condition passes: Either the `customer` host custom attribute is set to `customer-xy`
`OR` the host custom attribute `always_notify` is set to `true`.

The notification is ignored for services whose host name ends with `*internal`
`OR` the `priority` custom attribute is [less than](10-language-reference.md#expression-operators) `2`.

    template Notification "cust-xy-notification" {
      users = [ "noc-xy", "mgmt-xy" ]
      command = "mail-service-notification"
    }

    apply Notification "notify-cust-xy-mysql" to Service {
      import "cust-xy-notification"

      assign where match("*has gold support 24x7*", service.notes) && (host.vars.customer == "customer-xy" || host.vars.always_notify == true
      ignore where match("*internal", host.name) || (service.vars.priority < 2 && host.vars.is_clustered == true)
    }




#### <a id="using-apply-services"></a> Apply Services to Hosts

The sample configuration already ships a detailed example in [hosts.conf](2-getting-started.md#hosts-conf)
and [services.conf](2-getting-started.md#services-conf) for this use case.

The example for `ssh` applies a service object to all hosts with the `address`
attribute being defined and the custom attribute `os` set to the string `Linux` in `vars`.

    apply Service "ssh" {
      import "generic-service"

      check_command = "ssh"

      assign where host.address && host.vars.os == "Linux"
    }


Other detailed scenario examples are used in their respective chapters, for example
[apply services with custom command arguments](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply-services-command-arguments).

#### <a id="using-apply-notifications"></a> Apply Notifications to Hosts and Services

Notifications are applied to specific targets (`Host` or `Service`) and work in a similar
manner:


    apply Notification "mail-noc" to Service {
      import "mail-service-notification"

      user_groups = [ "noc" ]

      assign where host.vars.notification.mail
    }


In this example the `mail-noc` notification will be created as object for all services having the
`notification.mail` custom attribute defined. The notification command is set to `mail-service-notification`
and all members of the user group `noc` will get notified.

#### <a id="using-apply-dependencies"></a> Apply Dependencies to Hosts and Services

Detailed examples can be found in the [dependencies](3-monitoring-basics.md#dependencies) chapter.

#### <a id="using-apply-scheduledowntimes"></a> Apply Recurring Downtimes to Hosts and Services

The sample confituration ships an example in [downtimes.conf](2-getting-started.md#downtimes-conf).

Detailed examples can be found in the [recurring downtimes](3-monitoring-basics.md#recurring-downtimes) chapter.


#### <a id="using-apply-for"></a> Using Apply For Rules

Next to the standard way of using apply rules there is the requirement of generating
apply rules objects based on set (array or dictionary). That way you'll save quite
of a lot of duplicated apply rules by combining them into one generic generating
the object name with or without a prefix.

The sample configuration already ships a detailed example in [hosts.conf](2-getting-started.md#hosts-conf)
and [services.conf](2-getting-started.md#services-conf) for this use case.

Imagine a different example: You are monitoring your switch (hosts) with many
interfaces (services). The following requirements/problems apply:

* Each interface service check should be named with a prefix and a running number
* Each interface has its own vlan tag
* Some interfaces have QoS enabled
* Additional attributes such as `display_name` or `notes, `notes_url` and `action_url` must be
dynamically generated

By defining the `interfaces` dictionary with three example interfaces on the `core-switch`
host object, you'll make sure to pass the storage required by the for loop in the service apply
rule.


    object Host "core-switch" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "127.0.0.1"

      vars.interfaces["0"] = {
        port = 1
        vlan = "internal"
        address = "127.0.0.2"
        qos = "enabled"
      }
      vars.interfaces["1"] = {
        port = 2
        vlan = "mgmt"
        address = "127.0.1.2"
      }
      vars.interfaces["2"] = {
        port = 3
        vlan = "remote"
        address = "127.0.2.2"
      }
    }

You can also omit the `"if-"` string, then all generated service names are directly
taken from the `if_name` variable value.

The config dictionary contains all key-value pairs for the specific interface in one
loop cycle, like `port`, `vlan`, `address` and `qos` for the `0` interface.

By defining a default value for the custom attribute `qos` in the `vars` dictionary
before adding the `config` dictionary we''ll ensure that this attribute is always defined.

After `vars` is fully populated, all object attributes can be set. For strings, you can use
string concatention with the `+` operator.

You can also specifiy the check command that way.

    apply Service "if-" for (if_name => config in host.vars.interfaces) {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "ping4"

      vars.qos = "disabled"
      vars += config

      display_name = "if-" + if_name + "-" + vars.vlan

      notes = "Interface check for Port " + string(vars.port) + " in VLAN " + vars.vlan + " on Address " + vars.address + " QoS " + vars.qos
      notes_url = "http://foreman.company.com/hosts/" + host.name
      action_url = "http://snmp.checker.company.com/" + host.name + "if-" + if_name

      assign where host.vars.interfaces
    }

Note that numbers must be explicitely casted to string when adding to strings.
This can be achieved by wrapping them into the [string()](10-language-reference.md#function-calls) function.

> **Tip**
>
> Building configuration in that dynamic way requires detailed information
> of the generated objects. Use the `object list` [CLI command](5-cli-commands.md#cli-command-object)
> after successful [configuration validation](5-cli-commands.md#config-validation).


#### <a id="using-apply-object attributes"></a> Use Object Attributes in Apply Rules

Since apply rules are evaluated after the generic objects, you
can reference existing host and/or service object attributes as
values for any object attribute specified in that apply rule.

    object Host "opennebula-host" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "10.1.1.2"

      vars.hosting["xyz"] = {
        http_uri = "/shop"
        customer_name = "Customer xyz"
        customer_id = "7568"
        support_contract = "gold"
      }
      vars.hosting["abc"] = {
        http_uri = "/shop"
        customer_name = "Customer xyz"
        customer_id = "7568"
        support_contract = "silver"
      }
    }

    apply Service for (customer => config in host.vars.hosting) {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "ping4"

      vars.qos = "disabled"

      vars += config

      vars.http_uri = "/" + vars.customer + "/" + config.http_uri

      display_name = "Shop Check for " + vars.customer_name + "-" + vars.customer_id

      notes = "Support contract: " + vars.support_contract + " for Customer " + vars.customer_name + " (" + vars.customer_id + ")."

      notes_url = "http://foreman.company.com/hosts/" + host.name
      action_url = "http://snmp.checker.company.com/" + host.name + "/" + vars.customer_id

      assign where host.vars.hosting
    }

### <a id="groups"></a> Groups

Groups are used for combining hosts, services, and users into
accessible configuration attributes and views in external (web)
interfaces.

Group membership is defined at the respective object itself. If
you have a hostgroup name `windows` for example, and want to assign
specific hosts to this group for later viewing the group on your
alert dashboard, first create the hostgroup:

    object HostGroup "windows" {
      display_name = "Windows Servers"
    }

Then add your hosts to this hostgroup

    template Host "windows-server" {
      groups += [ "windows" ]
    }

    object Host "mssql-srv1" {
      import "windows-server"

      vars.mssql_port = 1433
    }

    object Host "mssql-srv2" {
      import "windows-server"

      vars.mssql_port = 1433
    }

This can be done for service and user groups the same way. Additionally
the user groups are associated as attributes in `Notification` objects.

    object UserGroup "windows-mssql-admins" {
      display_name = "Windows MSSQL Admins"
    }

    template User "generic-windows-mssql-users" {
      groups += [ "windows-mssql-admins" ]
    }

    object User "win-mssql-noc" {
      import "generic-windows-mssql-users"

      email = "noc@example.com"
    }

    object User "win-mssql-ops" {
      import "generic-windows-mssql-users"

      email = "ops@example.com"
    }

#### <a id="group-assign-intro"></a> Group Membership Assign

If there is a certain number of hosts, services, or users matching a pattern
it's reasonable to assign the group object to these members.
Details on the `assign where` syntax can be found [here](10-language-reference.md#apply)

    object HostGroup "prod-mssql" {
      display_name = "Production MSSQL Servers"
      assign where host.vars.mssql_port && host.vars.prod_mysql_db
      ignore where host.vars.test_server == true
      ignore where match("*internal", host.name)
    }

In this inherited example from above all hosts with the `vars` attribute `mssql_port`
set will be added as members to the host group `mssql`. All `*internal`
hosts or with the `test_server` attribute set to `true` will be ignored.

## <a id="notifications"></a> Notifications

Notifications for service and host problems are an integral part of your
monitoring setup.

When a host or service is in a downtime, a problem has been acknowledged or
the dependency logic determined that the host/service is unreachable, no
notifications are sent. You can configure additional type and state filters
refining the notifications being actually sent.

There are many ways of sending notifications, e.g. by e-mail, XMPP,
IRC, Twitter, etc. On its own Icinga 2 does not know how to send notifications.
Instead it relies on external mechanisms such as shell scripts to notify users.

A notification specification requires one or more users (and/or user groups)
who will be notified in case of problems. These users must have all custom
attributes defined which will be used in the `NotificationCommand` on execution.

The user `icingaadmin` in the example below will get notified only on `WARNING` and
`CRITICAL` states and `problem` and `recovery` notification types.

    object User "icingaadmin" {
      display_name = "Icinga 2 Admin"
      enable_notifications = true
      states = [ OK, Warning, Critical ]
      types = [ Problem, Recovery ]
      email = "icinga@localhost"
    }

If you don't set the `states` and `types` configuration attributes for the `User`
object, notifications for all states and types will be sent.

Details on troubleshooting notification problems can be found [here](8-troubleshooting.md#troubleshooting).

> **Note**
>
> Make sure that the [notification](5-cli-commands.md#features) feature is enabled on your master instance
> in order to execute notification commands.

You should choose which information you (and your notified users) are interested in
case of emergency, and also which information does not provide any value to you and
your environment.

An example notification command is explained [here](3-monitoring-basics.md#notification-commands).

You can add all shared attributes to a `Notification` template which is inherited
to the defined notifications. That way you'll save duplicated attributes in each
`Notification` object. Attributes can be overridden locally.

    template Notification "generic-notification" {
      interval = 15m

      command = "mail-service-notification"

      states = [ Warning, Critical, Unknown ]
      types = [ Problem, Acknowledgement, Recovery, Custom, FlappingStart,
                FlappingEnd, DowntimeStart, DowntimeEnd, DowntimeRemoved ]

      period = "24x7"
    }

The time period `24x7` is shipped as example configuration with Icinga 2.

Use the `apply` keyword to create `Notification` objects for your services:

    apply Notification "notify-cust-xy-mysql" to Service {
      import "generic-notification"

      users = [ "noc-xy", "mgmt-xy" ]

      assign where match("*has gold support 24x7*", service.notes) && (host.vars.customer == "customer-xy" || host.vars.always_notify == true
      ignore where match("*internal", host.name) || (service.vars.priority < 2 && host.vars.is_clustered == true)
    }


Instead of assigning users to notifications, you can also add the `user_groups`
attribute with a list of user groups to the `Notification` object. Icinga 2 will
send notifications to all group members.

> **Note**
>
> Only users who have been notified of a problem before  (`Warning`, `Critical`, `Unknown`
> states for services, `Down` for hosts) will receive `Recovery` notifications.

### <a id="notification-escalations"></a> Notification Escalations

When a problem notification is sent and a problem still exists at the time of re-notification
you may want to escalate the problem to the next support level. A different approach
is to configure the default notification by email, and escalate the problem via SMS
if not already solved.

You can define notification start and end times as additional configuration
attributes making the `Notification` object a so-called `notification escalation`.
Using templates you can share the basic notification attributes such as users or the
`interval` (and override them for the escalation then).

Using the example from above, you can define additional users being escalated for SMS
notifications between start and end time.

    object User "icinga-oncall-2nd-level" {
      display_name = "Icinga 2nd Level"

      vars.mobile = "+1 555 424642"
    }

    object User "icinga-oncall-1st-level" {
      display_name = "Icinga 1st Level"

      vars.mobile = "+1 555 424642"
    }

Define an additional [NotificationCommand](#notification) for SMS notifications.

> **Note**
>
> The example is not complete as there are many different SMS providers.
> Please note that sending SMS notifications will require an SMS provider
> or local hardware with a SIM card active.

    object NotificationCommand "sms-notification" {
       command = [
         PluginDir + "/send_sms_notification",
         "$mobile$",
         "..."
    }

The two new notification escalations are added onto the local host
and its service `ping4` using the `generic-notification` template.
The user `icinga-oncall-2nd-level` will get notified by SMS (`sms-notification`
command) after `30m` until `1h`.

> **Note**
>
> The `interval` was set to 15m in the `generic-notification`
> template example. Lower that value in your escalations by using a secondary
> template or by overriding the attribute directly in the `notifications` array
> position for `escalation-sms-2nd-level`.

If the problem does not get resolved nor acknowledged preventing further notifications
the `escalation-sms-1st-level` user will be escalated `1h` after the initial problem was
notified, but only for one hour (`2h` as `end` key for the `times` dictionary).

    apply Notification "mail" to Service {
      import "generic-notification"

      command = "mail-notification"
      users = [ "icingaadmin" ]

      assign where service.name == "ping4"
    }

    apply Notification "escalation-sms-2nd-level" to Service {
      import "generic-notification"

      command = "sms-notification"
      users = [ "icinga-oncall-2nd-level" ]

      times = {
        begin = 30m
        end = 1h
      }

      assign where service.name == "ping4"
    }

    apply Notification "escalation-sms-1st-level" to Service {
      import "generic-notification"

      command = "sms-notification"
      users = [ "icinga-oncall-1st-level" ]

      times = {
        begin = 1h
        end = 2h
      }

      assign where service.name == "ping4"
    }

### <a id="notification-delay"></a> Notification Delay

Sometimes the problem in question should not be notified when the notification is due
(the object reaching the `HARD` state) but a defined time duration afterwards. In Icinga 2
you can use the `times` dictionary and set `begin = 15m` as key and value if you want to
postpone the notification window for 15 minutes. Leave out the `end` key - if not set,
Icinga 2 will not check against any end time for this notification. Make sure to
specify a relatively low notification `interval` to get notified soon enough again.

    apply Notification "mail" to Service {
      import "generic-notification"

      command = "mail-notification"
      users = [ "icingaadmin" ]

      interval = 5m

      times.begin = 15m // delay notification window

      assign where service.name == "ping4"
    }

### <a id="disable-renotification"></a> Disable Re-notifications

If you prefer to be notified only once, you can disable re-notifications by setting the
`interval` attribute to `0`.

    apply Notification "notify-once" to Service {
      import "generic-notification"

      command = "mail-notification"
      users = [ "icingaadmin" ]

      interval = 0 // disable re-notification

      assign where service.name == "ping4"
    }

### <a id="notification-filters-state-type"></a> Notification Filters by State and Type

If there are no notification state and type filter attributes defined at the `Notification`
or `User` object Icinga 2 assumes that all states and types are being notified.

Available state and type filters for notifications are:

    template Notification "generic-notification" {

      states = [ Warning, Critical, Unknown ]
      types = [ Problem, Acknowledgement, Recovery, Custom, FlappingStart,
                FlappingEnd, DowntimeStart, DowntimeEnd, DowntimeRemoved ]
    }

If you are familiar with Icinga 1.x `notification_options` please note that they have been split
into type and state to allow more fine granular filtering for example on downtimes and flapping.
You can filter for acknowledgements and custom notifications too.s and custom notifications too.


## <a id="timeperiods"></a> Time Periods

Time Periods define time ranges in Icinga where event actions are
triggered, for example whether a service check is executed or not within
the `check_period` attribute. Or a notification should be sent to
users or not, filtered by the `period` and `notification_period`
configuration attributes for `Notification` and `User` objects.

> **Note**
>
> If you are familar with Icinga 1.x - these time period definitions
> are called `legacy timeperiods` in Icinga 2.
>
> An Icinga 2 legacy timeperiod requires the `ITL` provided template
>`legacy-timeperiod`.

The `TimePeriod` attribute `ranges` may contain multiple directives,
including weekdays, days of the month, and calendar dates.
These types may overlap/override other types in your ranges dictionary.

The descending order of precedence is as follows:

* Calendar date (2008-01-01)
* Specific month date (January 1st)
* Generic month date (Day 15)
* Offset weekday of specific month (2nd Tuesday in December)
* Offset weekday (3rd Monday)
* Normal weekday (Tuesday)

If you don't set any `check_period` or `notification_period` attribute
on your configuration objects Icinga 2 assumes `24x7` as time period
as shown below.

    object TimePeriod "24x7" {
      import "legacy-timeperiod"

      display_name = "Icinga 2 24x7 TimePeriod"
      ranges = {
        "monday"    = "00:00-24:00"
        "tuesday"   = "00:00-24:00"
        "wednesday" = "00:00-24:00"
        "thursday"  = "00:00-24:00"
        "friday"    = "00:00-24:00"
        "saturday"  = "00:00-24:00"
        "sunday"    = "00:00-24:00"
      }
    }

If your operation staff should only be notified during workhours
create a new timeperiod named `workhours` defining a work day from
09:00 to 17:00.

    object TimePeriod "workhours" {
      import "legacy-timeperiod"

      display_name = "Icinga 2 8x5 TimePeriod"
      ranges = {
        "monday"    = "09:00-17:00"
        "tuesday"   = "09:00-17:00"
        "wednesday" = "09:00-17:00"
        "thursday"  = "09:00-17:00"
        "friday"    = "09:00-17:00"
      }
    }

Use the `period` attribute to assign time periods to
`Notification` and `Dependency` objects:

    object Notification "mail" {
      import "generic-notification"

      host_name = "localhost"

      command = "mail-notification"
      users = [ "icingaadmin" ]
      period = "workhours"
    }


## <a id="commands"></a> Commands

Icinga 2 uses three different command object types to specify how
checks should be performed, notifications should be sent, and
events should be handled.

### <a id="command-environment-variables"></a> Environment Variables for Commands

Please check [Runtime Custom Attributes as Environment Variables](3-monitoring-basics.md#runtime-custom-attribute-env-vars).


### <a id="check-commands"></a> Check Commands

[CheckCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-checkcommand) objects define the command line how
a check is called.

[CheckCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-checkcommand) objects are referenced by
[Host](12-object-types.md#objecttype-host) and [Service](12-object-types.md#objecttype-service) objects
using the `check_command` attribute.

> **Note**
>
> Make sure that the [checker](5-cli-commands.md#features) feature is enabled in order to
> execute checks.

#### <a id="command-plugin-integration"></a> Integrate the Plugin with a CheckCommand Definition

[CheckCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-checkcommand) objects require the [ITL template](13-icinga-template-library.md#itl-plugin-check-command)
`plugin-check-command` to support native plugin based check methods.

Unless you have done so already, download your check plugin and put it
into the [PluginDir](2-getting-started.md#constants-conf) directory. The following example uses the
`check_disk` plugin shipped with the Monitoring Plugins package.

The plugin path and all command arguments are made a list of
double-quoted string arguments for proper shell escaping.

Call the `check_disk` plugin with the `--help` parameter to see
all available options. Our example defines warning (`-w`) and
critical (`-c`) thresholds for the disk usage. Without any
partition defined (`-p`) it will check all local partitions.

    icinga@icinga2 $ /usr/lib/nagios/plugins/check_disk --help
    ...
    This plugin checks the amount of used disk space on a mounted file system
    and generates an alert if free space is less than one of the threshold values


    Usage:
     check_disk -w limit -c limit [-W limit] [-K limit] {-p path | -x device}
    [-C] [-E] [-e] [-f] [-g group ] [-k] [-l] [-M] [-m] [-R path ] [-r path ]
    [-t timeout] [-u unit] [-v] [-X type] [-N type]
    ...

> **Note**
>
> Don't execute plugins as `root` and always use the absolute path to the plugin! Trust us.

Next step is to understand how command parameters are being passed from
a host or service object, and add a [CheckCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-checkcommand)
definition based on these required parameters and/or default values.

#### <a id="command-passing-parameters"></a> Passing Check Command Parameters from Host or Service

Check command parameters are defined as custom attributes which can be accessed as runtime macros
by the executed check command.

Define the default check command custom attribute `disk_wfree` and `disk_cfree`
(freely definable naming schema) and their default threshold values. You can
then use these custom attributes as runtime macros for [command arguments](3-monitoring-basics.md#command-arguments)
on the command line.

> **Tip**
>
> Use a common command type as prefix for your command arguments to increase
> readability. `disk_wfree` helps understanding the context better than just
> `wfree` as argument.

The default custom attributes can be overridden by the custom attributes
defined in the service using the check command `my-disk`. The custom attributes
can also be inherited from a parent template using additive inheritance (`+=`).

    object CheckCommand "my-disk" {
      import "plugin-check-command"

      command = [ PluginDir + "/check_disk" ]

      arguments = {
        "-w" = "$disk_wfree$%"
        "-c" = "$disk_cfree$%"
        "-W" = "$disk_inode_wfree$%"
        "-K" = "$disk_inode_cfree$%"
        "-p" = "$disk_partitions$"
        "-x" = "$disk_partitions_excluded$"
      }

      vars.disk_wfree = 20
      vars.disk_cfree = 10
    }

> **Note**
>
> A proper example for the `check_disk` plugin is already shipped with Icinga 2
> ready to use with the [plugin check commands](13-icinga-template-library.md#plugin-check-command-disk).

The host `localhost` with the applied service `basic-partitions` checks a basic set of disk partitions
with modified custom attributes (warning thresholds at `10%`, critical thresholds at `5%`
free disk space).

The custom attribute `disk_partition` can either hold a single string or an array of
string values for passing multiple partitions to the `check_disk` check plugin.

    object Host "my-server" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "127.0.0.1"
      address6 = "::1"

      vars.local_disks["basic-partitions"] = {
        disk_partitions = [ "/", "/tmp", "/var", "/home" ]
      }
    }

    apply Service for (disk => config in host.vars.local_disks) {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "my-disk"

      vars += config

      vars.disk_wfree = 10
      vars.disk_cfree = 5

      assign where host.vars.local_disks
    }


More details on using arrays in custom attributes can be found in
[this chapter](3-monitoring-basics.md#runtime-custom-attributes).


#### <a id="command-arguments"></a> Command Arguments

By defining a check command line using the `command` attribute Icinga 2
will resolve all macros in the static string or array. Sometimes it is
required to extend the arguments list based on a met condition evaluated
at command execution. Or making arguments optional - only set if the
macro value can be resolved by Icinga 2.

    object CheckCommand "check_http" {
      import "plugin-check-command"

      command = [ PluginDir + "/check_http" ]

      arguments = {
        "-H" = "$http_vhost$"
        "-I" = "$http_address$"
        "-u" = "$http_uri$"
        "-p" = "$http_port$"
        "-S" = {
          set_if = "$http_ssl$"
        }
        "--sni" = {
          set_if = "$http_sni$"
        }
        "-a" = {
          value = "$http_auth_pair$"
          description = "Username:password on sites with basic authentication"
        }
        "--no-body" = {
          set_if = "$http_ignore_body$"
        }
        "-r" = "$http_expect_body_regex$"
        "-w" = "$http_warn_time$"
        "-c" = "$http_critical_time$"
        "-e" = "$http_expect$"
      }

      vars.http_address = "$address$"
      vars.http_ssl = false
      vars.http_sni = false
    }

The example shows the `check_http` check command defining the most common
arguments. Each of them is optional by default and will be omitted if
the value is not set. For example if the service calling the check command
does not have `vars.http_port` set, it won't get added to the command
line.

If the `vars.http_ssl` custom attribute is set in the service, host or command
object definition, Icinga 2 will add the `-S` argument based on the `set_if`
numeric value to the command line. String values are not supported.

If the macro value cannot be resolved, Icinga 2 will not add the defined argument
to the final command argument array. Empty strings for macro values won't omit
the argument.

That way you can use the `check_http` command definition for both, with and
without SSL enabled checks saving you duplicated command definitions.

Details on all available options can be found in the
[CheckCommand object definition](12-object-types.md#objecttype-checkcommand).

### <a id="using-apply-services-command-arguments"></a> Apply Services with Custom Command Arguments

Imagine the following scenario: The `my-host1` host is reachable using the default port 22, while
the `my-host2` host requires a different port on 2222. Both hosts are in the hostgroup `my-linux-servers`.

    object HostGroup "my-linux-servers" {
      display_name = "Linux Servers"
      assign where host.vars.os == "Linux"
    }

    /* this one has port 22 opened */
    object Host "my-host1" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "129.168.1.50"
      vars.os = "Linux"
    }

    /* this one listens on a different ssh port */
    object Host "my-host2" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "129.168.2.50"
      vars.os = "Linux"
      vars.custom_ssh_port = 2222
    }

All hosts in the `my-linux-servers` hostgroup should get the `my-ssh` service applied based on an
[apply rule](10-language-reference.md#apply). The optional `ssh_port` command argument should be inherited from the host
the service is applied to. If not set, the check command `my-ssh` will omit the argument.
The `host` argument is special: `skip_key` tells Icinga 2 to ignore the key, and directly put the
value onto the command line. The `order` attribute specifies that this argument is the first one
(`-1` is smaller than the other defaults).

    object CheckCommand "my-ssh" {
      import "plugin-check-command"

      command = [ PluginDir + "/check_ssh" ]

      arguments = {
        "-p" = "$ssh_port$"
        "host" = {
          value = "$ssh_address$"
          skip_key = true
          order = -1
        }
      }

      vars.ssh_address = "$address$"
    }

    /* apply ssh service */
    apply Service "my-ssh" {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "my-ssh"

      //set the command argument for ssh port with a custom host attribute, if set
      vars.ssh_port = "$host.vars.custom_ssh_port$"

      assign where "my-linux-servers" in host.groups
    }

The `my-host1` will get the `my-ssh` service checking on the default port:

    [2014-05-26 21:52:23 +0200] notice/Process: Running command '/usr/lib/nagios/plugins/check_ssh', '129.168.1.50': PID 27281

The `my-host2` will inherit the `custom_ssh_port` variable to the service and execute a different command:

    [2014-05-26 21:51:32 +0200] notice/Process: Running command '/usr/lib/nagios/plugins/check_ssh', '-p', '2222', '129.168.2.50': PID 26956


### <a id="notification-commands"></a> Notification Commands

[NotificationCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-notificationcommand) objects define how notifications are delivered to external
interfaces (E-Mail, XMPP, IRC, Twitter, etc).

[NotificationCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-notificationcommand) objects are referenced by
[Notification](12-object-types.md#objecttype-notification) objects using the `command` attribute.

`NotificationCommand` objects require the [ITL template](13-icinga-template-library.md#itl-plugin-notification-command)
`plugin-notification-command` to support native plugin-based notifications.

> **Note**
>
> Make sure that the [notification](5-cli-commands.md#features) feature is enabled on your master instance
> in order to execute notification commands.

Below is an example using runtime macros from Icinga 2 (such as `$service.output$` for
the current check output) sending an email to the user(s) associated with the
notification itself (`$user.email$`).

If you want to specify default values for some of the custom attribute definitions,
you can add a `vars` dictionary as shown for the `CheckCommand` object.

    object NotificationCommand "mail-service-notification" {
      import "plugin-notification-command"

      command = [ SysconfDir + "/icinga2/scripts/mail-notification.sh" ]

      env = {
        NOTIFICATIONTYPE = "$notification.type$"
        SERVICEDESC = "$service.name$"
        HOSTALIAS = "$host.display_name$"
        HOSTADDRESS = "$address$"
        SERVICESTATE = "$service.state$"
        LONGDATETIME = "$icinga.long_date_time$"
        SERVICEOUTPUT = "$service.output$"
        NOTIFICATIONAUTHORNAME = "$notification.author$"
        NOTIFICATIONCOMMENT = "$notification.comment$"
    	HOSTDISPLAYNAME = "$host.display_name$"
        SERVICEDISPLAYNAME = "$service.display_name$"
        USEREMAIL = "$user.email$"
      }
    }

The command attribute in the `mail-service-notification` command refers to the following
shell script. The macros specified in the `env` array are exported
as environment variables and can be used in the notification script:

    #!/usr/bin/env bash
    template=$(cat <<TEMPLATE
    ***** Icinga  *****

    Notification Type: $NOTIFICATIONTYPE

    Service: $SERVICEDESC
    Host: $HOSTALIAS
    Address: $HOSTADDRESS
    State: $SERVICESTATE

    Date/Time: $LONGDATETIME

    Additional Info: $SERVICEOUTPUT

    Comment: [$NOTIFICATIONAUTHORNAME] $NOTIFICATIONCOMMENT
    TEMPLATE
    )

    /usr/bin/printf "%b" $template | mail -s "$NOTIFICATIONTYPE - $HOSTDISPLAYNAME - $SERVICEDISPLAYNAME is $SERVICESTATE" $USEREMAIL

> **Note**
>
> This example is for `exim` only. Requires changes for `sendmail` and
> other MTAs.

While it's possible to specify the entire notification command right
in the NotificationCommand object it is generally advisable to create a
shell script in the `/etc/icinga2/scripts` directory and have the
NotificationCommand object refer to that.

### <a id="event-commands"></a> Event Commands

Unlike notifications event commands for hosts/services are called on every
check execution if one of these conditions match:

* The host/service is in a [soft state](3-monitoring-basics.md#hard-soft-states)
* The host/service state changes into a [hard state](3-monitoring-basics.md#hard-soft-states)
* The host/service state recovers from a [soft or hard state](3-monitoring-basics.md#hard-soft-states) to [OK](3-monitoring-basics.md#service-states)/[Up](3-monitoring-basics.md#host-states)

[EventCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-eventcommand) objects are referenced by
[Host](12-object-types.md#objecttype-host) and [Service](12-object-types.md#objecttype-service) objects
using the `event_command` attribute.

Therefore the `EventCommand` object should define a command line
evaluating the current service state and other service runtime attributes
available through runtime vars. Runtime macros such as `$service.state_type$`
and `$service.state$` will be processed by Icinga 2 helping on fine-granular
events being triggered.

Common use case scenarios are a failing HTTP check requiring an immediate
restart via event command, or if an application is locked and requires
a restart upon detection.

`EventCommand` objects require the ITL template `plugin-event-command`
to support native plugin based checks.

#### <a id="event-command-restart-service-daemon"></a> Use Event Commands to Restart Service Daemon

The following example will triggert a restart of the `httpd` daemon
via ssh when the `http` service check fails. If the service state is
`OK`, it will not trigger any event action.

Requirements:

* ssh connection
* icinga user with public key authentication
* icinga user with sudo permissions for restarting the httpd daemon.

Example on Debian:

    # ls /home/icinga/.ssh/
    authorized_keys

    # visudo
    icinga  ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /etc/init.d/apache2 restart


Define a generic [EventCommand](12-object-types.md#objecttype-eventcommand) object `event_by_ssh`
which can be used for all event commands triggered using ssh:

    /* pass event commands through ssh */
    object EventCommand "event_by_ssh" {
      import "plugin-event-command"

      command = [ PluginDir + "/check_by_ssh" ]

      arguments = {
        "-H" = "$event_by_ssh_address$"
        "-p" = "$event_by_ssh_port$"
        "-C" = "$event_by_ssh_command$"
        "-l" = "$event_by_ssh_logname$"
        "-i" = "$event_by_ssh_identity$"
        "-q" = {
          set_if = "$event_by_ssh_quiet$"
        }
        "-w" = "$event_by_ssh_warn$"
        "-c" = "$event_by_ssh_crit$"
        "-t" = "$event_by_ssh_timeout$"
      }

      vars.event_by_ssh_address = "$address$"
      vars.event_by_ssh_quiet = false
    }

The actual event command only passes the `event_by_ssh_command` attribute.
The `event_by_ssh_service` custom attribute takes care of passing the correct
daemon name, while `test $service.state_id$ -gt 0` makes sure that the daemon
is only restarted when the service is an a not `OK` state.


    object EventCommand "event_by_ssh_restart_service" {
      import "event_by_ssh"

      //only restart the daemon if state > 0 (not-ok)
      //requires sudo permissions for the icinga user
      vars.event_by_ssh_command = "test $service.state_id$ -gt 0 && sudo /etc/init.d/$event_by_ssh_service$ restart"
    }


Now set the `event_command` attribute to `event_by_ssh_restart_service` and tell it
which service should be restarted using the `event_by_ssh_service` attribute.

    object Service "http" {
      import "generic-service"
      host_name = "remote-http-host"
      check_command = "http"

      event_command = "event_by_ssh_restart_service"
      vars.event_by_ssh_service = "$host.vars.httpd_name$"

      //vars.event_by_ssh_logname = "icinga"
      //vars.event_by_ssh_identity = "/home/icinga/.ssh/id_rsa.pub"
    }


Each host with this service then must define the `httpd_name` custom attribute
(for example generated from your cmdb):

    object Host "remote-http-host" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "192.168.1.100"

      vars.httpd_name = "apache2"
    }

You can testdrive this example by manually stopping the `httpd` daemon
on your `remote-http-host`. Enable the `debuglog` feature and tail the
`/var/log/icinga2/debug.log` file.

Remote Host Terminal:

    # date; service apache2 status
    Mon Sep 15 18:57:39 CEST 2014
    Apache2 is running (pid 23651).
    # date; service apache2 stop
    Mon Sep 15 18:57:47 CEST 2014
    [ ok ] Stopping web server: apache2 ... waiting .

Icinga 2 Host Terminal:

    [2014-09-15 18:58:32 +0200] notice/Process: Running command '/usr/lib64/nagios/plugins/check_http' '-I' '192.168.1.100': PID 32622
    [2014-09-15 18:58:32 +0200] notice/Process: PID 32622 ('/usr/lib64/nagios/plugins/check_http' '-I' '192.168.1.100') terminated with exit code 2
    [2014-09-15 18:58:32 +0200] notice/Checkable: State Change: Checkable remote-http-host!http soft state change from OK to CRITICAL detected.
    [2014-09-15 18:58:32 +0200] notice/Checkable: Executing event handler 'event_by_ssh_restart_service' for service 'remote-http-host!http'
    [2014-09-15 18:58:32 +0200] notice/Process: Running command '/usr/lib64/nagios/plugins/check_by_ssh' '-C' 'test 2 -gt 0 && sudo /etc/init.d/apache2 restart' '-H' '192.168.1.100': PID 32623
    [2014-09-15 18:58:33 +0200] notice/Process: PID 32623 ('/usr/lib64/nagios/plugins/check_by_ssh' '-C' 'test 2 -gt 0 && sudo /etc/init.d/apache2 restart' '-H' '192.168.1.100') terminated with exit code 0

Remote Host Terminal:

    # date; service apache2 status
    Mon Sep 15 18:58:44 CEST 2014
    Apache2 is running (pid 24908).




## <a id="dependencies"></a> Dependencies

Icinga 2 uses host and service [Dependency](12-object-types.md#objecttype-dependency) objects
for determing their network reachability.

A service can depend on a host, and vice versa. A service has an implicit
dependency (parent) to its host. A host to host dependency acts implicitly
as host parent relation.
When dependencies are calculated, not only the immediate parent is taken into
account but all parents are inherited.

The `parent_host_name` and `parent_service_name` attributes are mandatory for
service dependencies, `parent_host_name` is required for host dependencies.
[Apply rules](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply) will allow you to
[determine these attributes](3-monitoring-basics.md#dependencies-apply-custom-attributes) in a more
dynamic fashion if required.

    parent_host_name = "core-router"
    parent_service_name = "uplink-port"

Notifications are suppressed by default if a host or service becomes unreachable.
You can control that option by defining the `disable_notifications` attribute.

    disable_notifications = false

The dependency state filter must be defined based on the parent object being
either a host (`Up`, `Down`) or a service (`OK`, `Warning`, `Critical`, `Unknown`).

The following example will make the dependency fail and trigger it if the parent
object is **not** in one of these states:

    states = [ OK, Critical, Unknown ]

Rephrased: If the parent service object changes into the `Warning` state, this
dependency will fail and render all child objects (hosts or services) unreachable.

You can determine the child's reachability by querying the `is_reachable` attribute
in for example [DB IDO](14-appendix.md#schema-db-ido-extensions).

### <a id="dependencies-implicit-host-service"></a> Implicit Dependencies for Services on Host

Icinga 2 automatically adds an implicit dependency for services on their host. That way
service notifications are suppressed when a host is `DOWN` or `UNREACHABLE`. This dependency
does not overwrite other dependencies and implicitely sets `disable_notifications = true` and
`states = [ Up ]` for all service objects.

Service checks are still executed. If you want to prevent them from happening, you can
apply the following dependency to all services setting their host as `parent_host_name`
and disabling the checks. `assign where true` matches on all `Service` objects.

    apply Dependency "disable-host-service-checks" to Service {
      disable_checks = true
      assign where true
    }

### <a id="dependencies-network-reachability"></a> Dependencies for Network Reachability

A common scenario is the Icinga 2 server behind a router. Checking internet
access by pinging the Google DNS server `google-dns` is a common method, but
will fail in case the `dsl-router` host is down. Therefore the example below
defines a host dependency which acts implicitly as parent relation too.

Furthermore the host may be reachable but ping probes are dropped by the
router's firewall. In case the `dsl-router``ping4` service check fails, all
further checks for the `ping4` service on host `google-dns` service should
be suppressed. This is achieved by setting the `disable_checks` attribute to `true`.

    object Host "dsl-router" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "192.168.1.1"
    }

    object Host "google-dns" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "8.8.8.8"
    }

    apply Service "ping4" {
      import "generic-service"

      check_command = "ping4"

      assign where host.address
    }

    apply Dependency "internet" to Host {
      parent_host_name = "dsl-router"
      disable_checks = true
      disable_notifications = true

      assign where host.name != "dsl-router"
    }

    apply Dependency "internet" to Service {
      parent_host_name = "dsl-router"
      parent_service_name = "ping4"
      disable_checks = true

      assign where host.name != "dsl-router"
    }

### <a id="dependencies-apply-custom-attributes"></a> Apply Dependencies based on Custom Attributes

You can use [apply rules](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply) to set parent or
child attributes e.g. `parent_host_name`to other object's
attributes.

A common example are virtual machines hosted on a master. The object
name of that master is auto-generated from your CMDB or VMWare inventory
into the host's custom attributes (or a generic template for your
cloud).

Define your master host object:

    /* your master */
    object Host "master.example.com" {
      import "generic-host"
    }

Add a generic template defining all common host attributes:

    /* generic template for your virtual machines */
    template Host "generic-vm" {
      import "generic-host"
    }

Add a template for all hosts on your example.com cloud setting
custom attribute `vm_parent` to `master.example.com`:

    template Host "generic-vm-example.com" {
      import "generic-vm"
      vars.vm_parent = "master.example.com"
    }

Define your guest hosts:

    object Host "www.example1.com" {
      import "generic-vm-master.example.com"
    }

    object Host "www.example2.com" {
      import "generic-vm-master.example.com"
    }

Apply the host dependency to all child hosts importing the
`generic-vm` template and set the `parent_host_name`
to the previously defined custom attribute `host.vars.vm_parent`.

    apply Dependency "vm-host-to-parent-master" to Host {
      parent_host_name = host.vars.vm_parent
      assign where "generic-vm" in host.templates
    }

You can extend this example, and make your services depend on the
`master.example.com` host too. Their local scope allows you to use
`host.vars.vm_parent` similar to the example above.

    apply Dependency "vm-service-to-parent-master" to Service {
      parent_host_name = host.vars.vm_parent
      assign where "generic-vm" in host.templates
    }

That way you don't need to wait for your guest hosts becoming
unreachable when the master host goes down. Instead the services
will detect their reachability immediately when executing checks.

> **Note**
>
> This method with setting locally scoped variables only works in
> apply rules, but not in object definitions.


### <a id="dependencies-agent-checks"></a> Dependencies for Agent Checks

Another classic example are agent based checks. You would define a health check
for the agent daemon responding to your requests, and make all other services
querying that daemon depend on that health check.

The following configuration defines two nrpe based service checks `nrpe-load`
and `nrpe-disk` applied to the `nrpe-server`. The health check is defined as
`nrpe-health` service.

    apply Service "nrpe-health" {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "nrpe"
      assign where match("nrpe-*", host.name)
    }

    apply Service "nrpe-load" {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "nrpe"
      vars.nrpe_command = "check_load"
      assign where match("nrpe-*", host.name)
    }

    apply Service "nrpe-disk" {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "nrpe"
      vars.nrpe_command = "check_disk"
      assign where match("nrpe-*", host.name)
    }

    object Host "nrpe-server" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "192.168.1.5"
    }

    apply Dependency "disable-nrpe-checks" to Service {
      parent_service_name = "nrpe-health"

      states = [ OK ]
      disable_checks = true
      disable_notifications = true
      assign where service.check_command == "nrpe"
      ignore where service.name == "nrpe-health"
    }

The `disable-nrpe-checks` dependency is applied to all services
on the `nrpe-service` host using the `nrpe` check_command attribute
but not the `nrpe-health` service itself.


## <a id="downtimes"></a> Downtimes

Downtimes can be scheduled for planned server maintenance or
any other targetted service outage you are aware of in advance.

Downtimes will suppress any notifications, and may trigger other
downtimes too. If the downtime was set by accident, or the duration
exceeds the maintenance, you can manually cancel the downtime.
Planned downtimes will also be taken into account for SLA reporting
tools calculating the SLAs based on the state and downtime history.

Multiple downtimes for a single object may overlap. This is useful
when you want to extend your maintenance window taking longer than expected.
If there are multiple downtimes triggered for one object, the overall downtime depth
will be greater than `1`.


If the downtime was scheduled after the problem changed to a critical hard
state triggering a problem notification, and the service recovers during
the downtime window, the recovery notification won't be suppressed.

### <a id="fixed-flexible-downtimes"></a> Fixed and Flexible Downtimes

A `fixed` downtime will be activated at the defined start time, and
removed at the end time. During this time window the service state
will change to `NOT-OK` and then actually trigger the downtime.
Notifications are suppressed and the downtime depth is incremented.

Common scenarios are a planned distribution upgrade on your linux
servers, or database updates in your warehouse. The customer knows
about a fixed downtime window between 23:00 and 24:00. After 24:00
all problems should be alerted again. Solution is simple -
schedule a `fixed` downtime starting at 23:00 and ending at 24:00.

Unlike a `fixed` downtime, a `flexible` downtime will be triggered
by the state change in the time span defined by start and end time,
and then last for the specified duration in minutes.

Imagine the following scenario: Your service is frequently polled
by users trying to grab free deleted domains for immediate registration.
Between 07:30 and 08:00 the impact will hit for 15 minutes and generate
a network outage visible to the monitoring. The service is still alive,
but answering too slow to Icinga 2 service checks.
For that reason, you may want to schedule a downtime between 07:30 and
08:00 with a duration of 15 minutes. The downtime will then last from
its trigger time until the duration is over. After that, the downtime
is removed (may happen before or after the actual end time!).

### <a id="scheduling-downtime"></a> Scheduling a downtime

This can either happen through a web interface or by sending an [external command](3-monitoring-basics.md#external-commands)
to the external command pipe provided by the `ExternalCommandListener` configuration.

Fixed downtimes require a start and end time (a duration will be ignored).
Flexible downtimes need a start and end time for the time span, and a duration
independent from that time span.

### <a id="triggered-downtimes"></a> Triggered Downtimes

This is optional when scheduling a downtime. If there is already a downtime
scheduled for a future maintenance, the current downtime can be triggered by
that downtime. This renders useful if you have scheduled a host downtime and
are now scheduling a child host's downtime getting triggered by the parent
downtime on NOT-OK state change.

### <a id="recurring-downtimes"></a> Recurring Downtimes

[ScheduledDowntime objects](12-object-types.md#objecttype-scheduleddowntime) can be used to set up
recurring downtimes for services.

Example:

    apply ScheduledDowntime "backup-downtime" to Service {
      author = "icingaadmin"
      comment = "Scheduled downtime for backup"

      ranges = {
        monday = "02:00-03:00"
        tuesday = "02:00-03:00"
        wednesday = "02:00-03:00"
        thursday = "02:00-03:00"
        friday = "02:00-03:00"
        saturday = "02:00-03:00"
        sunday = "02:00-03:00"
      }

      assign where "backup" in service.groups
    }


## <a id="comments-intro"></a> Comments

Comments can be added at runtime and are persistent over restarts. You can
add useful information for others on repeating incidents (for example
"last time syslog at 100% cpu on 17.10.2013 due to stale nfs mount") which
is primarly accessible using web interfaces.

Adding and deleting comment actions are possible through the external command pipe
provided with the `ExternalCommandListener` configuration. The caller must
pass the comment id in case of manipulating an existing comment.


## <a id="acknowledgements"></a> Acknowledgements

If a problem is alerted and notified you may signal the other notification
recipients that you are aware of the problem and will handle it.

By sending an acknowledgement to Icinga 2 (using the external command pipe
provided with `ExternalCommandListener` configuration) all future notifications
are suppressed, a new comment is added with the provided description and
a notification with the type `NotificationFilterAcknowledgement` is sent
to all notified users.

### <a id="expiring-acknowledgements"></a> Expiring Acknowledgements

Once a problem is acknowledged it may disappear from your `handled problems`
dashboard and no-one ever looks at it again since it will suppress
notifications too.

This `fire-and-forget` action is quite common. If you're sure that a
current problem should be resolved in the future at a defined time,
you can define an expiration time when acknowledging the problem.

Icinga 2 will clear the acknowledgement when expired and start to
re-notify if the problem persists.



## <a id="custom-attributes"></a> Custom Attributes

### <a id="custom-attributes-apply"></a> Using Custom Attributes for Apply Rules

Custom attributes are not only used at runtime in command definitions to pass
command arguments, but are also a smart way to define patterns and groups
for applying objects for dynamic config generation.

There are several ways of using custom attributes with [apply rules](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply):

* As simple attribute literal ([number](10-language-reference.md#numeric-literals), [string](10-language-reference.md#string-literals),
[boolean](10-language-reference.md#boolean-literals)) for expression conditions (`assign where`, `ignore where`)
* As [array](10-language-reference.md#array) or [dictionary](10-language-reference.md#dictionary) attribute with nested values
(e.g. dictionaries in dictionaries) in [apply for](3-monitoring-basics.md#using-apply-for) rules.

Features like [DB IDO](3-monitoring-basics.md#db-ido), Livestatus(#setting-up-livestatus) or StatusData(#status-data)
dump this column as encoded JSON string, and set `is_json` resp. `cv_is_json` to `1`.

If arrays are used in runtime macros (for example `$host.groups$`) all entries
are separated using the `;` character. If an entry contains a semi-colon itself,
it is escaped like this: `entry1;ent\;ry2;entry3`.

### <a id="runtime-custom-attributes"></a> Using Custom Attributes at Runtime

Custom attributes may be used in command definitions to dynamically change how the command
is executed.

Additionally there are Icinga 2 features such as the [PerfDataWriter](3-monitoring-basics.md#performance-data) feature
which use custom runtime attributes to format their output.

> **Tip**
>
> Custom attributes are identified by the `vars` dictionary attribute as short name.
> Accessing the different attribute keys is possible using the [index accessor](10-language-reference.md#indexer) `.`.

Custom attributes in command definitions or performance data templates are evaluated at
runtime when executing a command. These custom attributes cannot be used somewhere else
for example in other configuration attributes.

Custom attribute values must be either a string, a number, a boolean value or an array.
Dictionaries cannot be used at the time of writing.

Arrays can be used to pass multiple arguments with or without repeating the key string.
This helps passing multiple parameters to check plugins requiring them. Prominent
plugin examples are:

* [check_disk -p](13-icinga-template-library.md#plugin-check-command-disk)
* [check_nrpe -a](13-icinga-template-library.md#plugin-check-command-nrpe)
* [check_nscp -l](13-icinga-template-library.md#plugin-check-command-nscp)
* [check_dns -a](13-icinga-template-library.md#plugin-check-command-dns)

More details on how to use `repeat_key` and other command argument options can be
found in [this section](12-object-types.md#objecttype-checkcommand-arguments).

> **Note**
>
> If a macro value cannot be resolved, be it a single macro, or a recursive macro
> containing an array of macros, the entire command argument is skipped.

This is an example of a command definition which uses user-defined custom attributes:

    object CheckCommand "my-icmp" {
      import "plugin-check-command"
      command = [ "/bin/sudo", PluginDir + "/check_icmp" ]

      arguments = {
        "-H" = {
          value = "$icmp_targets$"
          repeat_key = false
          order = 1
        }
        "-w" = "$icmp_wrta$,$icmp_wpl$%"
        "-c" = "$icmp_crta$,$icmp_cpl$%"
        "-s" = "$icmp_source$"
        "-n" = "$icmp_packets$"
        "-i" = "$icmp_packet_interval$"
        "-I" = "$icmp_target_interval$"
        "-m" = "$icmp_hosts_alive$"
        "-b" = "$icmp_data_bytes$"
        "-t" = "$icmp_timeout$"
      }

      vars.icmp_wrta = 200.00
      vars.icmp_wpl = 40
      vars.icmp_crta = 500.00
      vars.icmp_cpl = 80

      vars.notes = "Requires setuid root or sudo."
    }

Custom attribute names used at runtime must be enclosed in two `$` signs,
for example `$address$`.

> **Note**
>
> When using the `$` sign as single character, you need to escape it with an
> additional dollar sign (`$$`).

This example also makes use of the [command arguments](3-monitoring-basics.md#command-arguments) passed
to the command line.

You can integrate the above example `CheckCommand` definition
[passing command argument parameters](3-monitoring-basics.md#command-passing-parameters) like this:

    object Host "my-icmp-host" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "192.168.1.10"
      vars.address_mgmt = "192.168.2.10"
      vars.address_web = "192.168.10.10"
      vars.icmp_targets = [ "$address$", "$host.vars.address_mgmt$", "$host.vars.address_web$" ]
    }

    apply Service "my-icmp" {
      check_command = "my-icmp"
      check_interval = 1m
      retry_interval = 30s

      vars.icmp_targets = host.vars.icmp_targets

      assign where host.vars.icmp_targets
    }

### <a id="runtime-custom-attributes-evaluation-order"></a> Runtime Custom Attributes Evaluation Order

When executing commands Icinga 2 checks the following objects in this order to look
up custom attributes and their respective values:

1. User object (only for notifications)
2. Service object
3. Host object
4. Command object
5. Global custom attributes in the `vars` constant

This execution order allows you to define default values for custom attributes
in your command objects. The `my-ping` command shown above uses this to set
default values for some of the latency thresholds and timeouts.

When using the `my-ping` command you can override some or all of the custom
attributes in the service definition like this:

    object Service "ping" {
      host_name = "localhost"
      check_command = "my-ping"

      vars.ping_packets = 10 // Overrides the default value of 5 given in the command
    }

If a custom attribute isn't defined anywhere an empty value is used and a warning is
emitted to the Icinga 2 log.

> **Best Practice**
>
> By convention every host should have an `address` attribute. Hosts
> which have an IPv6 address should also have an `address6` attribute.

### <a id="runtime-custom-attribute-env-vars"></a> Runtime Custom Attributes as Environment Variables

The `env` command object attribute specifies a list of environment variables with values calculated
from either runtime macros or custom attributes which should be exported as environment variables
prior to executing the command.

This is useful for example for hiding sensitive information on the command line output
when passing credentials to database checks:

    object CheckCommand "mysql-health" {
      import "plugin-check-command"

      command = [
        PluginDir + "/check_mysql"
      ]

      arguments = {
        "-H" = "$mysql_address$"
        "-d" = "$mysql_database$"
      }

      vars.mysql_address = "$address$"
      vars.mysql_database = "icinga"
      vars.mysql_user = "icinga_check"
      vars.mysql_pass = "password"

      env.MYSQLUSER = "$mysql_user$"
      env.MYSQLPASS = "$mysql_pass$"
    }

### <a id="multiple-host-addresses-custom-attributes"></a> Multiple Host Addresses using Custom Attributes

The following example defines a `Host` with three different interface addresses defined as
custom attributes in the `vars` dictionary. The `if-eth0` and `if-eth1` services will import
these values into the `address` custom attribute. This attribute is available through the
generic `$address$` runtime macro.

    object Host "multi-ip" {
      check_command = "dummy"
      vars.address_lo = "127.0.0.1"
      vars.address_eth0 = "10.0.0.10"
      vars.address_eth1 = "192.168.1.10"
    }

    apply Service "if-eth0" {
      import "generic-service"

      vars.address = "$host.vars.address_eth0$"
      check_command = "my-generic-interface-check"

      assign where host.vars.address_eth0 != ""
    }

    apply Service "if-eth1" {
      import "generic-service"

      vars.address = "$host.vars.address_eth1$"
      check_command = "my-generic-interface-check"

      assign where host.vars.address_eth1 != ""
    }

    object CheckCommand "my-generic-interface-check" {
      import "plugin-check-command"

      command = "echo \"This would be the service $service.description$ using the address value: $address$\""
    }

The `CheckCommand` object is just an example to help you with testing and
understanding the different custom attributes and runtime macros.

### <a id="modified-attributes"></a> Modified Attributes

Icinga 2 allows you to modify defined object attributes at runtime different to
the local configuration object attributes. These modified attributes are
stored as bit-shifted-value and made available in backends. Icinga 2 stores
modified attributes in its state file and restores them on restart.

Modified Attributes can be reset using external commands.


## <a id="runtime-macros"></a> Runtime Macros

Next to custom attributes there are additional runtime macros made available by Icinga 2.
These runtime macros reflect the current object state and may change over time while
custom attributes are configured statically (but can be modified at runtime using
external commands).

### <a id="runtime-macro-evaluation-order"></a> Runtime Macro Evaluation Order

Custom attributes can be accessed at [runtime](3-monitoring-basics.md#runtime-custom-attributes) using their
identifier omitting the `vars.` prefix.
There are special cases when those custom attributes are not set and Icinga 2 provides
a fallback to existing object attributes for example `host.address`.

In the following example the `$address$` macro will be resolved with the value of `vars.address`.

    object Host "localhost" {
      import "generic-host"
      check_command = "my-host-macro-test"
      address = "127.0.0.1"
      vars.address = "127.2.2.2"
    }

    object CheckCommand "my-host-macro-test" {
      command = "echo \"address: $address$ host.address: $host.address$ host.vars.address: $host.vars.address$\""
    }

The check command output will look like

    "address: 127.2.2.2 host.address: 127.0.0.1 host.vars.address: 127.2.2.2"

If you alter the host object and remove the `vars.address` line, Icinga 2 will fail to look up `$address$` in the
custom attributes dictionary and then look for the host object's attribute.

The check command output will change to

    "address: 127.0.0.1 host.address: 127.0.0.1 host.vars.address: "


The same example can be defined for services overriding the `address` field based on a specific host custom attribute.

    object Host "localhost" {
      import "generic-host"
      address = "127.0.0.1"
      vars.macro_address = "127.3.3.3"
    }

    apply Service "my-macro-test" to Host {
      import "generic-service"
      check_command = "my-service-macro-test"
      vars.address = "$host.vars.macro_address$"

      assign where host.address
    }

    object CheckCommand "my-service-macro-test" {
      command = "echo \"address: $address$ host.address: $host.address$ host.vars.macro_address: $host.vars.macro_address$ service.vars.address: $service.vars.address$\""
    }

When the service check is executed the output looks like

    "address: 127.3.3.3 host.address: 127.0.0.1 host.vars.macro_address: 127.3.3.3 service.vars.address: 127.3.3.3"

That way you can easily override existing macros being accessed by their short name like `$address$` and refrain
from defining multiple check commands (one for `$address$` and one for `$host.vars.macro_address$`).


### <a id="host-runtime-macros"></a> Host Runtime Macros

The following host custom attributes are available in all commands that are executed for
hosts or services:

  Name                         | Description
  -----------------------------|--------------
  host.name                    | The name of the host object.
  host.display_name            | The value of the `display_name` attribute.
  host.state                   | The host's current state. Can be one of `UNREACHABLE`, `UP` and `DOWN`.
  host.state_id                | The host's current state. Can be one of `0` (up), `1` (down) and `2` (unreachable).
  host.state_type              | The host's current state type. Can be one of `SOFT` and `HARD`.
  host.check_attempt           | The current check attempt number.
  host.max_check_attempts      | The maximum number of checks which are executed before changing to a hard state.
  host.last_state              | The host's previous state. Can be one of `UNREACHABLE`, `UP` and `DOWN`.
  host.last_state_id           | The host's previous state. Can be one of `0` (up), `1` (down) and `2` (unreachable).
  host.last_state_type         | The host's previous state type. Can be one of `SOFT` and `HARD`.
  host.last_state_change       | The last state change's timestamp.
  host.duration_sec            | The time since the last state change.
  host.latency                 | The host's check latency.
  host.execution_time          | The host's check execution time.
  host.output                  | The last check's output.
  host.perfdata                | The last check's performance data.
  host.last_check              | The timestamp when the last check was executed.
  host.num_services            | Number of services associated with the host.
  host.num_services_ok         | Number of services associated with the host which are in an `OK` state.
  host.num_services_warning    | Number of services associated with the host which are in a `WARNING` state.
  host.num_services_unknown    | Number of services associated with the host which are in an `UNKNOWN` state.
  host.num_services_critical   | Number of services associated with the host which are in a `CRITICAL` state.

### <a id="service-runtime-macros"></a> Service Runtime Macros

The following service macros are available in all commands that are executed for
services:

  Name                       | Description
  ---------------------------|--------------
  service.name               | The short name of the service object.
  service.display_name       | The value of the `display_name` attribute.
  service.check_command      | The short name of the command along with any arguments to be used for the check.
  service.state              | The service's current state. Can be one of `OK`, `WARNING`, `CRITICAL` and `UNKNOWN`.
  service.state_id           | The service's current state. Can be one of `0` (ok), `1` (warning), `2` (critical) and `3` (unknown).
  service.state_type         | The service's current state type. Can be one of `SOFT` and `HARD`.
  service.check_attempt      | The current check attempt number.
  service.max_check_attempts | The maximum number of checks which are executed before changing to a hard state.
  service.last_state         | The service's previous state. Can be one of `OK`, `WARNING`, `CRITICAL` and `UNKNOWN`.
  service.last_state_id      | The service's previous state. Can be one of `0` (ok), `1` (warning), `2` (critical) and `3` (unknown).
  service.last_state_type    | The service's previous state type. Can be one of `SOFT` and `HARD`.
  service.last_state_change  | The last state change's timestamp.
  service.duration_sec       | The time since the last state change.
  service.latency            | The service's check latency.
  service.execution_time     | The service's check execution time.
  service.output             | The last check's output.
  service.perfdata           | The last check's performance data.
  service.last_check         | The timestamp when the last check was executed.

### <a id="command-runtime-macros"></a> Command Runtime Macros

The following custom attributes are available in all commands:

  Name                   | Description
  -----------------------|--------------
  command.name           | The name of the command object.

### <a id="user-runtime-macros"></a> User Runtime Macros

The following custom attributes are available in all commands that are executed for
users:

  Name                   | Description
  -----------------------|--------------
  user.name              | The name of the user object.
  user.display_name      | The value of the display_name attribute.

### <a id="notification-runtime-macros"></a> Notification Runtime Macros

  Name                   | Description
  -----------------------|--------------
  notification.type      | The type of the notification.
  notification.author    | The author of the notification comment, if existing.
  notification.comment   | The comment of the notification, if existing.

### <a id="global-runtime-macros"></a> Global Runtime Macros

The following macros are available in all executed commands:

  Name                   | Description
  -----------------------|--------------
  icinga.timet           | Current UNIX timestamp.
  icinga.long_date_time  | Current date and time including timezone information. Example: `2014-01-03 11:23:08 +0000`
  icinga.short_date_time | Current date and time. Example: `2014-01-03 11:23:08`
  icinga.date            | Current date. Example: `2014-01-03`
  icinga.time            | Current time including timezone information. Example: `11:23:08 +0000`
  icinga.uptime          | Current uptime of the Icinga 2 process.

The following macros provide global statistics:

  Name                              | Description
  ----------------------------------|--------------
  icinga.num_services_ok            | Current number of services in state 'OK'.
  icinga.num_services_warning       | Current number of services in state 'Warning'.
  icinga.num_services_critical      | Current number of services in state 'Critical'.
  icinga.num_services_unknown       | Current number of services in state 'Unknown'.
  icinga.num_services_pending       | Current number of pending services.
  icinga.num_services_unreachable   | Current number of unreachable services.
  icinga.num_services_flapping      | Current number of flapping services.
  icinga.num_services_in_downtime   | Current number of services in downtime.
  icinga.num_services_acknowledged  | Current number of acknowledged service problems.
  icinga.num_hosts_up               | Current number of hosts in state 'Up'.
  icinga.num_hosts_down             | Current number of hosts in state 'Down'.
  icinga.num_hosts_unreachable      | Current number of unreachable hosts.
  icinga.num_hosts_flapping         | Current number of flapping hosts.
  icinga.num_hosts_in_downtime      | Current number of hosts in downtime.
  icinga.num_hosts_acknowledged     | Current number of acknowledged host problems.


## <a id="check-result-freshness"></a> Check Result Freshness

In Icinga 2 active check freshness is enabled by default. It is determined by the
`check_interval` attribute and no incoming check results in that period of time.

    threshold = last check execution time + check interval

Passive check freshness is calculated from the `check_interval` attribute if set.

    threshold = last check result time + check interval

If the freshness checks are invalid, a new check is executed defined by the
`check_command` attribute.


## <a id="check-flapping"></a> Check Flapping

The flapping algorithm used in Icinga 2 does not store the past states but
calculcates the flapping threshold from a single value based on counters and
half-life values. Icinga 2 compares the value with a single flapping threshold
configuration attribute named `flapping_threshold`.

Flapping detection can be enabled or disabled using the `enable_flapping` attribute.


## <a id="volatile-services"></a> Volatile Services

By default all services remain in a non-volatile state. When a problem
occurs, the `SOFT` state applies and once `max_check_attempts` attribute
is reached with the check counter, a `HARD` state transition happens.
Notifications are only triggered by `HARD` state changes and are then
re-sent defined by the `interval` attribute.

It may be reasonable to have a volatile service which stays in a `HARD`
state type if the service stays in a `NOT-OK` state. That way each
service recheck will automatically trigger a notification unless the
service is acknowledged or in a scheduled downtime.


## <a id="external-commands"></a> External Commands

Icinga 2 provides an external command pipe for processing commands
triggering specific actions (for example rescheduling a service check
through the web interface).

In order to enable the `ExternalCommandListener` configuration use the
following command and restart Icinga 2 afterwards:

    # icinga2 feature enable command

Icinga 2 creates the command pipe file as `/var/run/icinga2/cmd/icinga2.cmd`
using the default configuration.

Web interfaces and other Icinga addons are able to send commands to
Icinga 2 through the external command pipe, for example for rescheduling
a forced service check:

    # /bin/echo "[`date +%s`] SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;ping4;`date +%s`" >> /var/run/icinga2/cmd/icinga2.cmd

    # tail -f /var/log/messages

    Oct 17 15:01:25 icinga-server icinga2: Executing external command: [1382014885] SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;ping4;1382014885
    Oct 17 15:01:25 icinga-server icinga2: Rescheduling next check for service 'ping4'


### <a id="external-command-list"></a> External Command List

A list of currently supported external commands can be found [here](14-appendix.md#external-commands-list-detail).

Detailed information on the commands and their required parameters can be found
on the [Icinga 1.x documentation](http://docs.icinga.org/latest/en/extcommands2.html).

## <a id="logging"></a> Logging

Icinga 2 supports three different types of logging:

* File logging
* Syslog (on *NIX-based operating systems)
* Console logging (`STDOUT` on tty)

You can enable additional loggers using the `icinga2 feature enable`
and `icinga2 feature disable` commands to configure loggers:

Feature  | Description
---------|------------
debuglog | Debug log (path: `/var/log/icinga2/debug.log`, severity: `debug` or higher)
mainlog  | Main log (path: `/var/log/icinga2/icinga2.log`, severity: `information` or higher)
syslog   | Syslog (severity: `warning` or higher)

By default file the `mainlog` feature is enabled. When running Icinga 2
on a terminal log messages with severity `information` or higher are
written to the console.


## <a id="performance-data"></a> Performance Data

When a host or service check is executed plugins should provide so-called
`performance data`. Next to that additional check performance data
can be fetched using Icinga 2 runtime macros such as the check latency
or the current service state (or additional custom attributes).

The performance data can be passed to external applications which aggregate and
store them in their backends. These tools usually generate graphs for historical
reporting and trending.

Well-known addons processing Icinga performance data are PNP4Nagios,
inGraph and Graphite.

### <a id="writing-performance-data-files"></a> Writing Performance Data Files

PNP4Nagios, inGraph and Graphios use performance data collector daemons to fetch
the current performance files for their backend updates.

Therefore the Icinga 2 `PerfdataWriter` object allows you to define
the output template format for host and services backed with Icinga 2
runtime vars.

    host_format_template = "DATATYPE::HOSTPERFDATA\tTIMET::$icinga.timet$\tHOSTNAME::$host.name$\tHOSTPERFDATA::$host.perfdata$\tHOSTCHECKCOMMAND::$host.checkcommand$\tHOSTSTATE::$host.state$\tHOSTSTATETYPE::$host.statetype$"
    service_format_template = "DATATYPE::SERVICEPERFDATA\tTIMET::$icinga.timet$\tHOSTNAME::$host.name$\tSERVICEDESC::$service.name$\tSERVICEPERFDATA::$service.perfdata$\tSERVICECHECKCOMMAND::$service.checkcommand$\tHOSTSTATE::$host.state$\tHOSTSTATETYPE::$host.statetype$\tSERVICESTATE::$service.state$\tSERVICESTATETYPE::$service.statetype$"

The default templates are already provided with the Icinga 2 feature configuration
which can be enabled using

    # icinga2 feature enable perfdata

By default all performance data files are rotated in a 15 seconds interval into
the `/var/spool/icinga2/perfdata/` directory as `host-perfdata.<timestamp>` and
`service-perfdata.<timestamp>`.
External collectors need to parse the rotated performance data files and then
remove the processed files.

### <a id="graphite-carbon-cache-writer"></a> Graphite Carbon Cache Writer

While there are some Graphite collector scripts and daemons like Graphios available for
Icinga 1.x it's more reasonable to directly process the check and plugin performance
in memory in Icinga 2. Once there are new metrics available, Icinga 2 will directly
write them to the defined Graphite Carbon daemon tcp socket.

You can enable the feature using

    # icinga2 feature enable graphite

By default the `GraphiteWriter` object expects the Graphite Carbon Cache to listen at
`127.0.0.1` on TCP port `2003`.

The current naming schema is

    icinga.<hostname>.<metricname>
    icinga.<hostname>.<servicename>.<metricname>

You can customize the metric prefix name by using the `host_name_template` and
`service_name_template` configuration attributes.

The example below uses [runtime macros](3-monitoring-basics.md#runtime-macros) and a
[global constant](10-language-reference.md#constants) named `GraphiteEnv`. The constant name
is freely definable and should be put in the [constants.conf](2-getting-started.md#constants-conf) file.

    const GraphiteEnv = "icinga.env1"

    object GraphiteWriter "graphite" {
      host_name_template = GraphiteEnv + ".$host.name$"
      service_name_template = GraphiteEnv + ".$host.name$.$service.name$"
    }

To make sure Icinga 2 writes a valid label into Graphite some characters are replaced
with `_` in the target name:

    \/.-  (and space)

The resulting name in Graphite might look like:

    www-01 / http-cert / response time
    icinga.www_01.http_cert.response_time

In addition to the performance data retrieved from the check plugin, Icinga 2 sends
internal check statistic data to Graphite:

  metric             | description
  -------------------|------------------------------------------
  current_attempt    | current check attempt
  max_check_attempts | maximum check attempts until the hard state is reached
  reachable          | checked object is reachable
  downtime_depth     | number of downtimes this object is in
  execution_time     | check execution time
  latency            | check latency
  state              | current state of the checked object
  state_type         | 0=SOFT, 1=HARD state

The following example illustrates how to configure the storage-schemas for Graphite Carbon
Cache. Please make sure that the order is correct because the first match wins.

    [icinga_internals]
    pattern = ^icinga\..*\.(max_check_attempts|reachable|current_attempt|execution_time|latency|state|state_type)
    retentions = 5m:7d

    [icinga_default]
    # intervals like PNP4Nagios uses them per default
    pattern = ^icinga\.
    retentions = 1m:2d,5m:10d,30m:90d,360m:4y

### <a id="gelfwriter"></a> GELF Writer

The `Graylog Extended Log Format` (short: [GELF](http://www.graylog2.org/resources/gelf))
can be used to send application logs directly to a TCP socket.

While it has been specified by the [graylog2](http://www.graylog2.org/) project as their
[input resource standard](http://www.graylog2.org/resources/gelf), other tools such as
[Logstash](http://www.logstash.net) also support `GELF` as
[input type](http://logstash.net/docs/latest/inputs/gelf).

You can enable the feature using

    # icinga2 feature enable gelf

By default the `GelfWriter` object expects the GELF receiver to listen at `127.0.0.1` on TCP port `12201`.
The default `source`  attribute is set to `icinga2`. You can customize that for your needs if required.

Currently these events are processed:
* Check results
* State changes
* Notifications


## <a id="status-data"></a> Status Data

Icinga 1.x writes object configuration data and status data in a cyclic
interval to its `objects.cache` and `status.dat` files. Icinga 2 provides
the `StatusDataWriter` object which dumps all configuration objects and
status updates in a regular interval.

    # icinga2 feature enable statusdata

Icinga 1.x Classic UI requires this data set as part of its backend.

> **Note**
>
> If you are not using any web interface or addon which uses these files
> you can safely disable this feature.


## <a id="compat-logging"></a> Compat Logging

The Icinga 1.x log format is considered being the `Compat Log`
in Icinga 2 provided with the `CompatLogger` object.

These logs are not only used for informational representation in
external web interfaces parsing the logs, but also to generate
SLA reports and trends in Icinga 1.x Classic UI. Furthermore the
[Livestatus](7-livestatus.md#setting-up-livestatus) feature uses these logs for answering queries to
historical tables.

The `CompatLogger` object can be enabled with

    # icinga2 feature enable compatlog

By default, the Icinga 1.x log file called `icinga.log` is located
in `/var/log/icinga2/compat`. Rotated log files are moved into
`var/log/icinga2/compat/archives`.

The format cannot be changed without breaking compatibility to
existing log parsers.

    # tail -f /var/log/icinga2/compat/icinga.log

    [1382115688] LOG ROTATION: HOURLY
    [1382115688] LOG VERSION: 2.0
    [1382115688] HOST STATE: CURRENT;localhost;UP;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;disk;WARNING;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;http;OK;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;load;OK;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;ping4;OK;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;ping6;OK;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;processes;WARNING;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;ssh;OK;HARD;1;
    [1382115688] SERVICE STATE: CURRENT;localhost;users;OK;HARD;1;
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;disk;1382115705
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;http;1382115705
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;load;1382115705
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;ping4;1382115705
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;ping6;1382115705
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;processes;1382115705
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;ssh;1382115705
    [1382115706] EXTERNAL COMMAND: SCHEDULE_FORCED_SVC_CHECK;localhost;users;1382115705
    [1382115731] EXTERNAL COMMAND: PROCESS_SERVICE_CHECK_RESULT;localhost;ping6;2;critical test|
    [1382115731] SERVICE ALERT: localhost;ping6;CRITICAL;SOFT;2;critical test




## <a id="db-ido"></a> DB IDO

The IDO (Icinga Data Output) modules for Icinga 2 take care of exporting all
configuration and status information into a database. The IDO database is used
by a number of projects including Icinga Web 1.x and 2.

Details on the installation can be found in the [Configuring DB IDO](2-getting-started.md#configuring-db-ido)
chapter. Details on the configuration can be found in the
[IdoMysqlConnection](12-object-types.md#objecttype-idomysqlconnection) and
[IdoPgsqlConnection](12-object-types.md#objecttype-idopgsqlconnection)
object configuration documentation.
The DB IDO feature supports [High Availability](4-monitoring-remote-systems.md#high-availability-db-ido) in
the Icinga 2 cluster.

The following example query checks the health of the current Icinga 2 instance
writing its current status to the DB IDO backend table `icinga_programstatus`
every 10 seconds. By default it checks 60 seconds into the past which is a reasonable
amount of time - adjust it for your requirements. If the condition is not met,
the query returns an empty result.

> **Tip**
>
> Use [check plugins](6-addons-plugins.md#plugins) to monitor the backend.

Replace the `default` string with your instance name, if different.

Example for MySQL:

    # mysql -u root -p icinga -e "SELECT status_update_time FROM icinga_programstatus ps
      JOIN icinga_instances i ON ps.instance_id=i.instance_id
      WHERE (UNIX_TIMESTAMP(ps.status_update_time) > UNIX_TIMESTAMP(NOW())-60)
      AND i.instance_name='default';"

    +---------------------+
    | status_update_time  |
    +---------------------+
    | 2014-05-29 14:29:56 |
    +---------------------+


Example for PostgreSQL:

    # export PGPASSWORD=icinga; psql -U icinga -d icinga -c "SELECT ps.status_update_time FROM icinga_programstatus AS ps
      JOIN icinga_instances AS i ON ps.instance_id=i.instance_id
      WHERE ((SELECT extract(epoch from status_update_time) FROM icinga_programstatus) > (SELECT extract(epoch from now())-60))
      AND i.instance_name='default'";

    status_update_time
    ------------------------
     2014-05-29 15:11:38+02
    (1 Zeile)


A detailed list on the available table attributes can be found in the [DB IDO Schema documentation](14-appendix.md#schema-db-ido).


## <a id="check-result-files"></a> Check Result Files

Icinga 1.x writes its check result files to a temporary spool directory
where they are processed in a regular interval.
While this is extremely inefficient in performance regards it has been
rendered useful for passing passive check results directly into Icinga 1.x
skipping the external command pipe.

Several clustered/distributed environments and check-aggregation addons
use that method. In order to support step-by-step migration of these
environments, Icinga 2 ships the `CheckResultReader` object.

There is no feature configuration available, but it must be defined
on-demand in your Icinga 2 objects configuration.

    object CheckResultReader "reader" {
      spool_dir = "/data/check-results"
    }
