.TH ICINGA2 "8" "October 2015" "icinga2 - The Icinga 2 network monitoring daemon"
.SH NAME
icinga2 \- The Icinga 2 network monitoring daemon

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B icinga2
.I command
[
.I command options
][
.I global options
]

.I command
:= [
.B api | ca | console | daemon | feature | node | object | pki | variable
]
.B --help

.SH DESCRIPTION

Icinga 2 is an open source monitoring system which checks the availability of your network resources, notifies users of outages, and generates performance data for reporting.

Scalable and extensible, Icinga 2 can monitor large, complex environments across multiple locations.

.SH OPTIONS
Details for specific command options can be viewed by invoking the command name with
.B --help
parameter.

.SS Global options
.TP
.B -h,--help
Show this help message.
.TP
.B -V,--version
Show version information.
.TP
.B --color
Use VT100 color codes even when stdout is not a terminal.
.TP
.BI "-D, --define" " arg"
Define a constant.
.TP
.BI "-l, --library" " arg"
Load a library.
.TP
.BI "-I, --include" " arg"
Add include search directory.
.TP
.BI "-x, --log-level" " [ debug | notice | information | warning | critical ]"
Specify the log level for the console log, default is
.B information.
.TP
.BI "-X, --script-debugger"
Enables the script debugger. When an exception occurs or the 'debugger' keyword
is encountered in a user script Icinga 2 launches the script debugger that
allows the user to debug the script.

.SS daemon options
The CLI command daemon provides the functionality to start/stop Icinga 2.
Furthermore it provides the configuration validation.

.TP
.BI "-c, --config" " arg"
Using this option you can specify one or more configuration files.
Config files are processed in the order they are specified on the command-line.

When no configuration file is specified and the
.B --no-config
is not used, Icinga 2 automatically falls back to using the configuration file
.B ConfigDir + "/icinga2.conf"
(where ConfigDir is usually
.BI "/etc/icinga2" ")."

.TP
.B "-z, --noconfig"
Start without a configuration file.
.TP
.B "-C, --validate"
This option can be used to check if your configuration files contain errors.
If any errors are found the exit status is 1, otherwise 0 is returned.
.TP
.BI "-e, --errorlog" " arg"
Log fatal errors to the specified log file (only works in combination with
.BR "--daemonize" ")."
.TP
.B "-d, --daemonize"
Detach from the controlling terminal.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs at <https://github.com/Icinga/icinga2>
.br
Icinga home page: <https://icinga.com/>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2012 Icinga GmbH
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
